---
title: 'Case Study - CVE-2024-47177 - Code Review and Exploitation'
date: 2025-04-28
permalink: /posts/2025/04/cve-2024-47177-part-1/
tags:
  - Case Study
  - CVE
  - Code Review
excerpt: "Starting the code review into CVE-2024-47177"
---



## Time Tally

- Time spent on topic: `4 hours`
- Total time spent on series: `20 hours`

---

Good day hackers! 

In my last blog, we were learning about the UDP protocol and related Nmap scans. 

I thought it would be fun to look up any high-impact, preferably recent CVEs that are discovered via UDP ports.

And I found [CVE-2024-47177](https://www.tenable.com/cve/CVE-2024-47177)!

Evilsocket did [a very detailed blog](https://www.evilsocket.net/2024/09/26/Attacking-UNIX-systems-via-CUPS-Part-I/) post on this vulnerability. It is a great opportunity for our first vulnerability analysis follow-along.  

Without further ado, let's get to it!

## Let's take a look at the code

The goal of reviewing code for vulnerabilities is usually to look for **user inputs** for **high impact functionalities**, and examine whether that input is handled securely. 

With that in mind, onward we go.

---

I have always dreamed of finding my own zero-day, which means I need to be able to read, understand, and analyze complex code (even if it's C). So I'm taking this chance to practice.

At first glance of the [cups-browsed](https://github.com/OpenPrinting/cups-browsed/tree/2.0.1) repo, I look for a `main` function or an equivalent entry point of the program. This is found in `daemon/cups-browsed.c`.

*Note: I selected the 2.0.1 version of the repo, which is the last version that was vulnerable to RCE.*

Next, I skim through the comments to locate code of interest (CoI). 

"Initialization" ... "Read commandline options" ... "Help" ... "Read `cups-browsed.conf`" ... "`SIGINT` and `SIGTERM` handling" ... "set up CUPS browsing socket" ... 

"Run the main loop". Bingo!

With the main loop created with `g_main_loop_new (NULL, FALSE)` [here](https://github.com/OpenPrinting/cups-browsed/blob/2.0.1/daemon/cups-browsed.c#L14052) , it looks like we're watching for incoming browsing data with `process_browse_data` at [line 14059](https://github.com/OpenPrinting/cups-browsed/blob/2.0.1/daemon/cups-browsed.c#L14059), using `g_io_add_watch`.

The definition for `process_browse_data` can be found at [Line 11795](https://github.com/OpenPrinting/cups-browsed/blob/2.0.1/daemon/cups-browsed.c#L11795)

It seems to be performing some checks on the packet received by `cups-browsed`, and then calling another function `found_cups_printer`.

These checks might be important, because they define what would be considered a legit printer.

We will look deeper into the code tomorrow!

---

## May 11th, 2025 Update - more code review and a bit of environment setup for exploitation!


## `process_browse_data`
- Receives packet
- set end of packet to \0
- if `recv` failed, then print error
- check if packet is allowed - using allow()

---

What does `allowed()` check?

Let's assume the configuration file is empty, which is by default.

This means:
- `browseallow_all` is set to 1
- `browse_order` is set to `ORDER_DENY_ALLOW`
 - IF `browse_order` is `ORDER_DENY_ALLOW`, `server_allowed` is set to `TRUE`

With these assumptions, let's follow the for loop.
 - FOR loop first iteration:
	 - Sets `sense` to `ALLOW_DENY`. According to the comment, we're dealing with `BrowseDeny` lines first.
	 - IF `browsedeny_all`  is `TRUE`, and `sense` is `ALLOW_DENY`, then set `server_allowed` to `FALSE`.
	- continue to the next iteration immediately
- FOR loop second iteration:
	- Sets `sense` to `ALOW_ALLOW`
	- IF `browsedeny_all` is `TRUE` and `sense` is `ALLOW_ALLOW`, then set `server_allowed` to `TRUE`.
	- Continue to the next iteration.
	- Except there's no next iteration.
	- loop TERMINATES.
- `server_allowed` is RETURNED as `TRUE`.

**Conclusion:** When configuration file is empty, any packet received is allowed!

Alright - let's keep going.

After checking with `allowed()`, we check the packet format using `sscanf`, and if formatted correctly, then we extract the info and location field from the packet.

According the evilsocket's blog, this parsing mechanism caused bugs that allow DoS attacks. It has its own CVE [here](https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2024-47850).

This other CVE won't be my focus for now, due to my absolute lack of knowledge when it comes to binary exploitation. I might revisit it in the future.

Let's look at `found_cups_printer` and progress towards our RCE vulnerability.

## `found_cups_printer`

- Parsing the URI with `httpSeparateURI`
- Checking if the printer came from "our own broadcast"
- Checking the `resource` string starts with either `/printers/` or `/classes/`.
- Build this new printer's `DNS-SD` service name.
- **calls `examine_discovered_printer_record`!**

Cool - let's follow the code and look at what this function does!

## `examine_discovered_printer_record`

- Checks if all required fields are populated
- Calls `remove_bad_chars` to sanitize the URI - this could be worth a look, since it's a sanitizing function.
- Performs numerous different parsing actions and checks for printer information
- calls `create_remote_printer_entry` for a remote printer that has a unique URI (no local printer queue has the same URI).

## `create_remote_printer_entry`

- Checks all necessary fields are populated
- Copy printer info from different fields
- Perform different actions based on various scenarios. **However, the comment at [line 6785](https://github.com/OpenPrinting/cups-browsed/blob/2.0.1/daemon/cups-browsed.c#L14059)** looks interesting:

```
For a remote CUPS printer our local queue will be raw or get a
PPD file from the remote CUPS server, so that the driver on the remote CUPS server gets used. So we will not generate a PPD file or interface script at this point.
```

So....if certain conditions are met when a remote printer is connected, then no need to generate a PPD file. 

But that could mean that in other cases, a PDD file *will* be generated?

At this point, it is time to get a bit more hands-on than code reviewing. Let's fire up an environment to test this out.

## Hands-on lab environment set up!

Download a VM image for Ubuntu 24.04 LTS - I downloaded one from [here](https://www.linuxvmimages.com/images/ubuntu-2404/)

Check the version of `cups` and `cups-browsed`: 
- for `cups`, open a browser and navigate to `http://localhost:631`. There are many other ways, of course.
- for `cups-browsed`, use the following command: `cups-browsed --version` or `cups-browsed -v`

For this VM image I downloaded, `cups` and `cups-browsed` are running by default, and the version of `cups-browsed` is `2.0.0`, which means it is vulnerable to RCE by default. Crazy.

Oh yeah - remember to disconnect the VM from the internet. For obvious reasons.

Configure a `host-only` network between my Windows host machine and the Ubuntu VM running the vulnerable machine. 

We will then write a python script to imitate a remote IPP printer trying to connect to the `cups-browsed` service.

Now double check if `cups-browsed` is running on UDP port 631 as expected:

```
ss -lnu 
# we see here that the UDP port 631 is accepting connections on all interfaces.

sudo lsof -i :631
# this shows that *:631 is indeed used by cups-browsed
```

---



