---
title: 'Mitre ATT&CK - Active Scanning Part 1'
date: 2025-04-14
permalink: /posts/2025/04/active-scanning-part-1/
tags:
  - Mitre ATT&CK
  - Red Team
  - Active Scanning
  - Nmap
excerpt: "Let's get started with Active Scanning and Nmap!"
---

## Time Tally

- Time spent on topic: `4 hours`
- Total time spent on series: `11 hours`

Hello hackers,

Today we dig into our first Mitre ATT&CK technique: `Active Scanning`, `T1595`. This technique is part of the tactic `Reconnaissance`, `TA0043`.

Reconnaissance is the first phase of various established [cyber kill chains](https://www.lockheedmartin.com/en-us/capabilities/cyber/cyber-kill-chain.html). During this phase, threat actors perform mass, targeted scanning to gather info, and locate potentially vulnerable targets. 
## Mass Scanning

To make things more fun, I started the day by watching this video: [DEF CON 22 - Graham, Mcmillan, and Tentler - Mass Scanning the Internet](https://youtu.be/nX9JXI4l3-E?si=g7AzpHQiTSo4NbQH)

It's a fun, lighthearted watch, where the speakers talked about their tool, [massscan](https://github.com/robertdavidgraham/masscan), their experience scanning the entire internet, the results, the types of complaint and panic such a scan would cause, etc. 

Check out their talk if you'd like, and their tool! But I wouldn't recommend scanning the whole internet from your PC. Not when we've already got [shodan](https://www.shodan.io/).
## Nmap - let's follow the code

After watching a fun DEF CON talk, I started diving into the WORK. I wanted to see how nmap works by reading its source code in addition to the wiki.

For nmap, I had mainly the following questions:
- How many different types of scans does nmap do?
- How does the different types of scans differ from each other?
- How does its OS fingerprinting and service fingerprinting work?

Let's find the answers to these questions!
## How many types of scans can nmap perform?

....Yeah. It turned out that there are a LOT more types of scans than the 4 or 5 I usually use in pentesting. I don't want this to turn into a nmap wiki, so I will try to understand each type of scan, and do a short summary of what it does, and add contextual knowledge that I'm learning along the way.

From the source code, I could see 16 different scan types. Let's dig in.
## (1/16) `SYN` SCAN
 
 Send a `SYN` packet to the target port. 
 
 If `SYN/ACK` is returned, then port is `open`. 
 
 If `RST` is returned, then port is `closed`. 
 
 If no response or ICMP error is received, then port shows up as `filtered`.

## What is this SYN, ACK, RST stuff?

### TCP 3-way handshake

When computers try to establish a TCP connection between them over the network, they do a little handshake. It goes like this:

Client     ----   `SYN`   --->         Server

Client     <--- `SYN/ACK` ----      Server

Client     ----   `ACK`   --->         Server

For a SYN_SCAN in nmap, the scanner only sends a `SYN`. 

If the server returns a `SYN/ACK`, that means it is listening for a connection, and is ready to do the handshake.

Nmap then leaves the server hanging by never completing the handshake with another `ACK`, because we've already got what we need. The port is listening.

### RST vs ICMP? 

If nmap receives `RST` or an ICMP error upon sending a `SYN` packet, then the port will show up as `closed`.

But are these two different?

Of course.

`RST` is like saying "I received your `SYN`, but I'm not gonna do the handshake with you. I'm not listening for a connection."

ICMP errors upon sending SYN is like "hey I failed to deliver your `SYN` packet to where you want it to go. Please double check the destination."

## Up Next

Here's a complete list of scan types in nmap.
- `SYN_SCAN`
- `ACK_SCAN`
- `WINDOW_SCAN`
- `FIN_SCAN`
- `XMAS_SCAN`
- `NULL_SCAN`
- `MAIMON_SCAN`
- `UDP_SCAN`
- `CONNECT_SCAN`
- `SCTP_INIT_SCAN`
- `SCTP_COOKIE_ECHO_SCAN`
- `IPPROT_SCAN`
- `IDLE_SCAN`
- `BOUNCE_SCAN`
- `SERVICE_SCAN`
- `SCRIPT_SCAN`

We have covered the first one. 15 more to go.

I also want to try and write a script that performs these types of scans. 

Well - See you tomorrow!
