---
title: 'Mitre ATT&CK - Active Scanning Part 3'
date: 2025-04-17
permalink: /posts/2025/04/active-scanning-part-3/
tags:
  - Mitre ATT&CK
  - Red Team
  - Active Scanning
  - Nmap
excerpt: "UDP protocol, scan type, and TCP connect scans"
---


## Time Tally

- Time spent on topic: `3 hours`
- Total time spent on series: `16 hours`

---
## (8/16) UDP Scan

Let's take a look at the UDP scan type of Nmap! This scan type can be evoked with flag `-sU`.

Good news is, the UDP protocol is still widely in use, unlike `RFC 793` discussed in the previous blog.

Let's look at the protocol itself, and the challenges of performing an accurate UDP scan!

## The UDP Protocol

It is very different from TCP.

TCP requires the 3-way handshake at the beginning to establish a connection - UDP ***does not***.

TCP header has a sequence number to keep packets in order - UDP ***does not***.

The receiver of a TCP packet would respond with ACK to acknowledge receipt - UDP ***does not*** enforce this.

UDP packets are sent at a target regardless whether there is an established connection, or whether the packets are received, sent in order, or lost in the void.

In conclusion, UDP is highly unregulated.

## Nmap's UDP scanning technique

Because of the unregulated nature of the UDP protocol, It is very challenging to scan UDP ports and determine their states. 

Without a universally honored handshake, different UDP services define their own distinct "handshakes". If an invalid UDP packet is received (one that does not fit the start of a handshake for any given specific service), then the packet will be dropped with no response at all.

When given only the `-sU` flag, Nmap sends an empty UDP packet to the target port, except for well-established UDP ports such as `53`, `67`/`68`,`161`/`162`. This will result in no response for most ports. Nmap will then mark these unresponsive ports as `open|filtered`

On the other hand, if the ports returned ICMP unreachable error, then Nmap considers the port `closed`.

If other ICMP errors are returned, the the port will show up as `filtered` as well.

This can be quite inaccurate. 

## Addressing the inaccuracy

To combat this inaccuracy, it is recommended that a *Version Probe* to be combined with a UDP scan. The flags to use are: `-sUV`.

With this additional `-V` flag, Nmap utilizes its database containing all the known UDP handshakes, and send them to all the target UDP ports. If any of the saved UDP handshake elicits a response, then the port will be labeled `open`.

This sounds like a lot of work, and it is. There are certain things we can do to speed up a UDP scan while maintaining improved accuracy. These techniques are listed [here](https://nmap.org/book/scan-methods-udp-scan.html) in the wiki. 

## (9/16) TCP Connect Scan

TCP connect scan uses flag `-sT`.

This one is more straightforward. Nmap attempts to perform the full 3-way handshake with the target ports, and terminates the connection using a `RST` packet immediately after.

It achieves the same purpose as the `SYN` scan, but could potentially cause the target machine to log the established connection since a full handshake is completed.

The connect scan is used when `SYN` scan is unavailable - when you don't have root access to the machine you're scanning from.

`SYN` scan is recommended over connect scan whenever possible.

## Up Next

Tomorrow we will start looking at the SCTP protocol and related scans.

I'm also curious to see if there are any CVEs discovered from UDP ports. Gotta connect the theories to real-world examples :)

See you guys tomorrow!