---
title: 'Intro to Mitre ATT&CK'
date: 2025-04-12
permalink: /posts/2025/04/intro-to-mitre-attck/
tags:
  - Mitre ATT&CK
  - Red Team
excerpt: "First look at Mitre ATT&CK"
---

## Time Tally

- Time spent on topic: `2 hours`
- Total time spent on series: `7 hours`

## What is Mitre ATT&CK

First off, it's pronounced `MY-tər`. I did not know that.

[Mitre ATT&CK](https://attack.mitre.org/) is a knowledge base of adversary tactics and techniques used by real-world threat actors/groups. These actors/groups are usually referred to as an APT (Advanced Persistent Threat). 

Oooh, it excites me by just looking at this treasure trove of techniques that we're going to dig through one by one. *Rubs hands.* 

## What is included in Mitre ATT&CK?

The knowledge base includes adversary tactics and techniques for the following categories:
- Enterprise
	- PRE (Pre-attack)
	- Windows
	- MacOS
	- Linux
	- Cloud
	- Network
	- Containers
- Mobile Devices
	- Android
	- iOS
- ICS (Industrial Control Systems)

## How is this knowledge base used?

Disclaimer: This part is the result of me googling. If anything is inaccurate, please point it out, and I'd be happy to correct it.

- **Communication**: Each tactic/technique is tagged with a unique identifier, so that people can report malicious behavior with clarity and reference.
- **APT Identification**: Each APT has their signature moves. While they can evolve and change, ATT&CK can help to a degree with identifying which APT we're dealing with.
- **Adversary Emulation**: Companies hire red teams to perform adversary emulation exercises to find vulnerabilities in their defense. ATT&CK allows companies to choose APTs that are relevant for the red team to emulate. 

## Up Next

We're gonna use the Mitre ATT&CK framework as a road map, and dig into every technique - how they are actually leveraged in the real world. Go slow, steady, and consistent. We learn the fundamentals. Not going to brush off `Active Scanning` because I know how to nmap.

See you guys tomorrow!