---
title: 'Spinning up a quick static blogging site via Github Pages'
date: 2025-04-12
permalink: /posts/2025/04/spinning-up-a-quick-static-blogging-site-via-github-pages/
tags:
  - Setup
  - Github
excerpt: "In this blog, I will cover how I set up this very website you're looking at."
---

Hello! This is the very first blog. In this blog, I will cover how I set up this very website you're looking at. 

**TL;DR** 
- Host on `Github Pages` with a premade template.
- (Optional) Locally run the server to enable easier debugging process.
- Edit site config and metadata to make the site your own.
- ...?
- Profit.
- **Time spent:** around 5 hours spread across two days.

## Step 1: Choose a blog template and get it running on Github Pages

I used [academicpages](https://github.com/academicpages/academicpages.github.io). The `Readme` section of this template has a detailed guide on how to host the site on Github Pages, or running it locally for debugging purposes. I outlined the steps that I personally did down below. 

## Step 2: Run locally to debug/modify the site

With WSL/Linux:

- Clone the blog repo
- Update and install necessary dependencies

    ```bash
    sudo apt update && sudo apt upgrade -y
    sudo apt install ruby-dev ruby-bundler nodejs
    ```

- `cd` to the directory of the repo and run:

    ```bash
    bundle config set --local path 'vendor/bundle'
    bundle install
    ```

- Add these entries to `.gitignore`, so that changes in these folders are untracked:

    ```
    /vendor
    /.bundle
    ```

- Serve the site locally at `localhost:4000`:

    ```bash
    bundle exec jekyll serve -l -H localhost --force-polling
    ```
    `--force-polling` enables dynamic application of changes to the content, except for changes in `_config.yml`. To apply changes in `config.yml`, you need to restart the server from command line using the command above.

## Modify Site-wide configuration to fit your needs

Take a look at the diffs listed here: [http://archive.is/3TPas](http://archive.is/3TPas)  
Follow them to re-configure the site for it to be yours!

## Write the first blog!

There are a couple of sample markdown files for blog posts under the `_posts` folder. It's pretty straightforward to modify the metadata at the top and the content underneath it. The site interprets [Kramdown](https://kramdown.gettalong.org/) syntax.

One thing to note is that you need to set the `excerpt` attribute in the metadata of a blog post to configure the preview of said blog post. Otherwise, the preview would be the entire post by default. (There is a length cutoff for previews when there are multiple posts in the list, but when there is only one blog post, the entire blog would be shown as preview.)

## Conclusion

Well - this is it! If you have any questions, feel free to contact me on LinkedIn. I will try to set up a discord server soon.

See you tomorrow!